README.md, before:

<!-- These are examples of badges you might want to add to your README:
     please update the URLs accordingly

[![Built Status](https://api.cirrus-ci.com/github/<USER>/BiocFrame.svg?branch=main)](https://cirrus-ci.com/github/<USER>/BiocFrame)
[![ReadTheDocs](https://readthedocs.org/projects/BiocFrame/badge/?version=latest)](https://BiocFrame.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)
[![Coveralls](https://img.shields.io/coveralls/github/<USER>/BiocFrame/main.svg)](https://coveralls.io/r/<USER>/BiocFrame)
[![PyPI-Server](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/BiocFrame.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/BiocFrame/)
[![Conda-Forge](https://img.shields.io/conda/vn/conda-forge/BiocFrame.svg)](https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/BiocFrame)
[![Monthly Downloads](https://pepy.tech/badge/BiocFrame/month)](https://pepy.tech/project/BiocFrame)
[![Twitter](https://img.shields.io/twitter/url/http/shields.io.svg?style=social&label=Twitter)](https://twitter.com/BiocFrame)
-->

[![Project generated with PyScaffold](https://img.shields.io/badge/-PyScaffold-005CA0?logo=pyscaffold)](https://pyscaffold.org/)
[![PyPI-Server](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/BiocFrame.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/BiocFrame/)
![Unit tests](https://github.com/BiocPy/BiocFrame/actions/workflows/pypi-test.yml/badge.svg)

# BiocFrame

This package provides `BiocFrame` class, an alternative to Pandas DataFrame's.

`BiocFrame` makes no assumption on the types of the columns, the minimum requirement is each column implements length: `__len__` and slice: `__getitem__` dunder methods. This allows `BiocFrame` to accept nested representations or any supported class as columns.


To get started, install the package from [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/biocframe/)

```shell
pip install biocframe
```

## Usage

To construct a `BiocFrame` object, simply provide the data as a dictionary.

```python
from random import random
from biocframe import BiocFrame

obj = {
    "ensembl": ["ENS00001", "ENS00002", "ENS00003"],
    "symbol": ["MAP1A", "BIN1", "ESR1"],
}
bframe = BiocFrame(obj)
print(bframe)
```

    ## output
    BiocFrame with 3 rows and 2 columns
        ensembl symbol
        <list> <list>
    [0] ENS00001  MAP1A
    [1] ENS00002   BIN1
    [2] ENS00003   ESR1

You can specify complex representations as columns, for example

```python
obj = {
    "ensembl": ["ENS00001", "ENS00002", "ENS00002"],
    "symbol": ["MAP1A", "BIN1", "ESR1"],
    "ranges": BiocFrame({
        "chr": ["chr1", "chr2", "chr3"],
        "start": [1000, 1100, 5000],
        "end": [1100, 4000, 5500]
    }),
}

bframe2 = BiocFrame(obj, row_names=["row1", "row2", "row3"])
print(bframe2)
```

    ## output
    BiocFrame with 3 rows and 3 columns
        ensembl symbol         ranges
        <list> <list>    <BiocFrame>
    row1 ENS00001  MAP1A chr1:1000:1100
    row2 ENS00002   BIN1 chr2:1100:4000
    row3 ENS00002   ESR1 chr3:5000:5500

### Properties

Properties can be accessed directly from the object, for e.g. column names, row names and/or dimensions of the `BiocFrame`.

```python
# Dimensionality or shape
print(bframe.dims)

## output
## (3, 2)

# get the column names
print(bframe.column_names)

## output
## ['ensembl', 'symbol']
```

#### Setters

To set various properties

```python
# set new column names
bframe.column_names = ["column1", "column2"]
print(bframe)
```

    ## output
    BiocFrame with 3 rows and 2 columns
        column1 column2
        <list>  <list>
    [0] ENS00001   MAP1A
    [1] ENS00002    BIN1
    [2] ENS00003    ESR1

To add new columns,

```python
bframe["score"] = range(2, 5)
print(bframe)
```

    ## output
    BiocFrame with 3 rows and 3 columns
        column1 column2   score
        <list>  <list> <range>
    [0] ENS00001   MAP1A       2
    [1] ENS00002    BIN1       3
    [2] ENS00003    ESR1       4

### Subset `BiocFrame`

Use the subset (`[]`) operator to **slice** the object,

```python
sliced = bframe[1:2, [True, False, False]]
print(sliced)
```

    ## output
    BiocFrame with 1 row and 1 column
        column1
        <list>
    [0] ENS00002

This operation accepts different slice input types, you can either specify a boolean vector, a `slice` object, a list of indices, or row/column names to subset.


### Combine

`BiocFrame` implements the combine generic from [biocgenerics](https://github.com/BiocPy/generics). To combine multiple objects,

```python
bframe1 = BiocFrame(
    {
        "odd": [1, 3, 5, 7, 9],
        "even": [0, 2, 4, 6, 8],
    }
)

bframe2 = BiocFrame(
    {
        "odd": [11, 33, 55, 77, 99],
        "even": [0, 22, 44, 66, 88],
    }
)

from biocgenerics.combine import combine
combined = combine(bframe1, bframe2)

# OR an object oriented approach

combined = bframe1.combine(bframe2)
```

    ## output
    BiocFrame with 10 rows and 2 columns
        odd   even
        <list> <list>
    [0]      1      0
    [1]      3      2
    [2]      5      4
    [3]      7      6
    [4]      9      8
    [5]     11      0
    [6]     33     22
    [7]     55     44
    [8]     77     66
    [9]     99     88

For more details, check out the BiocFrame class [reference](https://biocpy.github.io/BiocFrame/api/biocframe.html#biocframe.BiocFrame.BiocFrame).


<!-- pyscaffold-notes -->

## Note

This project has been set up using PyScaffold 4.5. For details and usage
information on PyScaffold see https://pyscaffold.org/.

Commit message:

Add functional style getters and setters (#55).
Both BiocFrame and Factor classes both implement functional style getters and setters. These methods support either in-place operation or make a new copy of the instance.

In addition, one can continue accessing properties directly. Property setters are now in-place operations! 

All tests, documentation has been updated to the new version of the classes.

README.md, after:

<!-- These are examples of badges you might want to add to your README:
     please update the URLs accordingly

[![Built Status](https://api.cirrus-ci.com/github/<USER>/BiocFrame.svg?branch=main)](https://cirrus-ci.com/github/<USER>/BiocFrame)
[![ReadTheDocs](https://readthedocs.org/projects/BiocFrame/badge/?version=latest)](https://BiocFrame.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)
[![Coveralls](https://img.shields.io/coveralls/github/<USER>/BiocFrame/main.svg)](https://coveralls.io/r/<USER>/BiocFrame)
[![PyPI-Server](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/BiocFrame.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/BiocFrame/)
[![Conda-Forge](https://img.shields.io/conda/vn/conda-forge/BiocFrame.svg)](https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/BiocFrame)
[![Monthly Downloads](https://pepy.tech/badge/BiocFrame/month)](https://pepy.tech/project/BiocFrame)
[![Twitter](https://img.shields.io/twitter/url/http/shields.io.svg?style=social&label=Twitter)](https://twitter.com/BiocFrame)
-->

[![Project generated with PyScaffold](https://img.shields.io/badge/-PyScaffold-005CA0?logo=pyscaffold)](https://pyscaffold.org/)
[![PyPI-Server](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/BiocFrame.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/BiocFrame/)
![Unit tests](https://github.com/BiocPy/BiocFrame/actions/workflows/pypi-test.yml/badge.svg)

# BiocFrame

This package provides

- `BiocFrame` class, an alternative to Pandas `DataFrame`.

    `BiocFrame` makes no assumption on the types of the columns, the minimum requirement is each column implements length: `__len__` and slice: `__getitem__` dunder methods. This allows `BiocFrame` to accept nested representations or any supported class as columns.

- `Factor` class, equivalent to R's `factor`.

    The aim is to encode a list of strings as integers for easier numerical analysis.


To get started, install the package from [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/biocframe/)

```shell
pip install biocframe
```

## BiocFrame

To construct a `BiocFrame` object, simply provide the data as a dictionary.

```python
from random import random
from biocframe import BiocFrame

obj = {
    "ensembl": ["ENS00001", "ENS00002", "ENS00003"],
    "symbol": ["MAP1A", "BIN1", "ESR1"],
}
bframe = BiocFrame(obj)
print(bframe)
```

    ## output
    BiocFrame with 3 rows and 2 columns
        ensembl symbol
        <list> <list>
    [0] ENS00001  MAP1A
    [1] ENS00002   BIN1
    [2] ENS00003   ESR1

You can specify complex representations as columns, for example

```python
obj = {
    "ensembl": ["ENS00001", "ENS00002", "ENS00002"],
    "symbol": ["MAP1A", "BIN1", "ESR1"],
    "ranges": BiocFrame({
        "chr": ["chr1", "chr2", "chr3"],
        "start": [1000, 1100, 5000],
        "end": [1100, 4000, 5500]
    }),
}

bframe2 = BiocFrame(obj, row_names=["row1", "row2", "row3"])
print(bframe2)
```

    ## output
    BiocFrame with 3 rows and 3 columns
        ensembl symbol         ranges
        <list> <list>    <BiocFrame>
    row1 ENS00001  MAP1A chr1:1000:1100
    row2 ENS00002   BIN1 chr2:1100:4000
    row3 ENS00002   ESR1 chr3:5000:5500

### Properties

Properties can be accessed directly from the object, for e.g. column names, row names and/or dimensions of the `BiocFrame`.

```python
# Dimensionality or shape
print(bframe.dims)

## output
## (3, 2)

# get the column names
print(bframe.column_names)

## output
## ['ensembl', 'symbol']
```

#### Setters

To set various properties

```python
# set new column names
bframe.column_names = ["column1", "column2"]
print(bframe)
```

    ## output
    BiocFrame with 3 rows and 2 columns
        column1 column2
        <list>  <list>
    [0] ENS00001   MAP1A
    [1] ENS00002    BIN1
    [2] ENS00003    ESR1

To add new columns,

```python
bframe["score"] = range(2, 5)
print(bframe)
```

    ## output
    BiocFrame with 3 rows and 3 columns
        column1 column2   score
        <list>  <list> <range>
    [0] ENS00001   MAP1A       2
    [1] ENS00002    BIN1       3
    [2] ENS00003    ESR1       4

### Subset `BiocFrame`

Use the subset (`[]`) operator to **slice** the object,

```python
sliced = bframe[1:2, [True, False, False]]
print(sliced)
```

    ## output
    BiocFrame with 1 row and 1 column
        column1
        <list>
    [0] ENS00002

This operation accepts different slice input types, you can either specify a boolean vector, a `slice` object, a list of indices, or row/column names to subset.


### Combine

`BiocFrame` implements the combine generic from [biocgenerics](https://github.com/BiocPy/generics). To combine multiple objects,

```python
bframe1 = BiocFrame(
    {
        "odd": [1, 3, 5, 7, 9],
        "even": [0, 2, 4, 6, 8],
    }
)

bframe2 = BiocFrame(
    {
        "odd": [11, 33, 55, 77, 99],
        "even": [0, 22, 44, 66, 88],
    }
)

from biocgenerics.combine import combine
combined = combine(bframe1, bframe2)

# OR an object oriented approach

combined = bframe1.combine(bframe2)
```

    ## output
    BiocFrame with 10 rows and 2 columns
        odd   even
        <list> <list>
    [0]      1      0
    [1]      3      2
    [2]      5      4
    [3]      7      6
    [4]      9      8
    [5]     11      0
    [6]     33     22
    [7]     55     44
    [8]     77     66
    [9]     99     88

For more details, check out the BiocFrame class [reference](https://biocpy.github.io/BiocFrame/api/biocframe.html#biocframe.BiocFrame.BiocFrame).

## Factor

Convert a list into a Factor object,

```python
from biocframe import Factor

f1 = Factor.from_list(["A", "B", "A", "B", "E"])
print(f1)
```

    ## output
    Factor of length 5 with 3 levels
    values: ['A', 'B', 'A', 'B', 'E']
    levels: ['A', 'B', 'E']
    ordered: False


The Factor class behaves as a list and most operations to slice or replace should work here. Check out the docs for more information!

<!-- pyscaffold-notes -->

## Note

This project has been set up using PyScaffold 4.5. For details and usage
information on PyScaffold see https://pyscaffold.org/.
